---
title: "My Journey With Metditation: a retrospective"
date: 2025-10-01T20:31:37+02:00
tags: [meditation, reflection]
categories: ["Blog"]
draft: true
---

Have you ever felt like you're constantly running behind, always trying to catch up but never quite in control? If so, you're not alone. For a long time, I felt this way too, and sometimes I still do. But over the past couple of years, I've experienced a significant shift in my mindset and overall well-being, and it's been in my mind for a while to share my experience.

If you know me or you have've listened to me speak on podcasts, [especially the first times](https://creators.spotify.com/pod/profile/degrees-of-freedom/episodes/S1-Ep7---Failing-Forward-e2oidaa/a-abhk913), you would have found the beginning of this post no surprise. I often felt like I was running behind my agenda, always catching up and never in control, to the point that this was starting draining my energies. This feeling has become less and less of a theme in my life, and a few people have asked me why. I can see now that in many respects I've changed. And perhaps it can be useful for someone else if share what happened to bring about this change.

That's what this post is about. You might know some of this story because it partly came up six months ago in an [episode of Degrees of Freedom](https://creators.spotify.com/pod/profile/degrees-of-freedom/episodes/S4E02---Emotional-health-and-mindfulness-in-education-e2rvs3o), but at that time I was not yet ready to look back and tell the whole thing.

About two years ago, motivated by the feelings that I already described and by the meditation experience shared by [Oliver](https://creators.spotify.com/pod/profile/not-just-numbers/episodes/S1E05---Pure-Maths--with-Oliver-Lorscheid-and-Jaap-Top-e2g4ibd/a-ab084qc) and [Cecilia](https://creators.spotify.com/pod/profile/not-just-numbers/episodes/S1E03---Teaching-mathematics--with-Tams-Grbe-and-Ceclia-Salgado-e2bsae3/a-aajrsif) in [It's Not Just Numbers](https://creators.spotify.com/pod/profile/not-just-numbers),
I decided I had enough and wanted try to do something. And meditation had been on my mind for a while. I was aware of the many proven benefits (for instance, improved focus and overall well-being, and reduced anxiety), I heard about some of the risks, and I had tried it already a few times in the (far) past. It had never really stuck with me.

In fact, months prior, I had taken already a different path: quitting most of my social media accounts, and reducing my screen time and phone usage. But that was still not enough. I needed something more substantial and introspective. I really felt that I needed to somehow push the breaks and take a breath.

In an interview to Mingyur Rinpoche, a world-renown meditation teacher, I had heard a surprising fact, apparently also supported by scientific evidence: _it doesn't matter how much or how long you meditate, as long as you do it regularly enough_. Since I knew it would be hard to fit anything of reasonable length into my schedule, I decided to embrace this idea and aimed at meditating every day, for at least one minute. That's how it started: one minute a day, with the freedom to make it longer if I wanted.

The sparkle that lighted the fire, was the black friday discount on the Headspace app (which I would actually not recommend to anyone). I like the style of Andy Puddicombe, the founder of Headspace, long departed from the company (which I did not know at that point). So, I thought, why not? I just needed an excuse to start and force myself into it. Paying for something seemed like the right thing to guilt myself into starting.

For the first few months, I used the basic and pro courses by Andy on the Headspace app, setting the time first to a couple of minutes so that it would be easy to fit it in the schedule. But more than the story itself, what's interesting is the experience. For the first few months, the only thing I noticed was rather cliché: the more day passed, the worse I felt at being able to focus. *I was constantly lost in thoughts*. But I had decided to stick with it for as long as I could, and everyone writes that it is a normal phenomenon: I was just becoming more aware of thoughts that would have normally been there anyway. I didn't notice any other difference. For what I knew, I was just wasting my time.

A few months into this, I was still lost in thought but it was becoming more effortless. And I could at least feel the temporary relaxation while meditating, which was pleasant. I had also started slowly increasing the time I was spending, reaching about 10 to 15 minutes a day in the morning before starting work, with peaks of 20 to 30 minutes every now and then when I could afford it. I would enter my office, close the door, and take whatever time I had before 9.00 to sit with my breath. I still did not notice any other difference.

At some point, in spring, my wife surprised me. Out of nowhere she told me to stick with whatever I was doing because somehow it had changed how I was relating to her and our kids for the better. This was the first, strong validation for me. I honestly didn't consciously decide to do anything differently, and I did not even realize that I was doing something differently. But apparently, I was. This was the biggest encouragement to keep going that I could possibly get.

It was only a few more months in, eight or nine from when I started, that I began to notice some small things. First of all, when I started I had issues falling asleep. It would take a substantial while from the time I went to bed to actually falling asleep. I had tried reducing screen time before bed without much success. Until, one morning, I suddenly realized that it had been a while that I did not have issues falling asleep anymore. Moreover, on those rare nights I felt to struggle, focusing on my breath would help me fall asleep in no time.

Another thing I noticed was that I was becoming more aware of my feelings before they fully developed and took over. I would start to feel emotions like anger or sadness coming on, noticing what was triggering it... I still have the emotional intelligence of a goldfish, but I was noticing these feelings a lot more. I wasn't yet able to take action on it, but the awareness itself was a big change. Next to this, I could see that I was also starting to be generally more present.

A for more months passed until I noticed that my baseline state had changed. I used to be a lot more anxious, but now I was calmer and less attached to my triggers.

To this day, I think this is actually the biggest change I have noticed: being intentionally present and feeling satisfied with my life, even in the face of challenges. I am often amazed by the beauty in small things, like the way the light filters through the leaves of a tree or the sound of birds chirping when going to work. I often surprise myself appreciating these moments without feeling the need to constantly be doing something or achieving a goal. This has brought a sense of peace and contentment to my life that I had not experienced before or at least for a long while.

This doesn't mean that I don't get upset, anxious, or sad. In fact, I feel those emotions probably more since I am much more aware of them. And I'm still not always able to act on this awareness, especially when I am tired, but the shift is there and it's significant. It means that I can now often catch myself before I spiral into negative thought patterns or get overwhelmed by stress. It hasn't just become easier to act against some of the automatisms I've embodied until now, it has also become easier to connect with others and be present with them.

Some behaviors that I started observing, I've embodied for so long that I don't expect them to change, or at least not to change quickly. But already noticing the difference in some of them after just two years of very minimal practice is quite significant for me. And it's also one of the main reasons I'm speaking about it.

There's another side to this picture: I find it much easier to work, organize, and basically sit on top of things instead of being driven around. I'm generally more relaxed and more energetic and I can focus for longer periods of time. I still have a long way to go, but the difference is already quite significant.

Is all of this the result of the practice or not? I don't and can't know. It's surely a mix of things, but I'd say it reflects pretty much what research has been showing about meditation. I feel more in control of my life and my emotions, and I'm able to handle stress and challenges with more ease. Well worth the effort (which, really, was mostly minimal).

My most recent observation, is that I can now sometimes stay with difficult emotions without being overwhelmed by them. Instead of letting the emotions control me, I can accept them and use the energy they provide to take action and make positive changes in my life. This is still to new to be able to say more, I'll need time to understand and develop the skill, and it still feels strange. But is another welcome surprise of this journey, and I start to look forward to see what comes next.

Overall, if you're feeling stuck in a similar mental situation, I would really recommend giving meditation a try. See for yourself if it works for you. Sometimes the most profound changes come from simply being present and appreciating the beauty around us. We've discussed resilience and emotional intelligence on [Degrees of Freedom](https://creators.spotify.com/pod/profile/degrees-of-freedom/episodes/S4E02---Emotional-health-and-mindfulness-in-education-e2rvs3o) before, an episode motivated by this journey, and and I'm curious about your thoughts and experiences. Please share your stories in the comments below.

Going back to how to start, there are some excellent free applications out there, as well as lots of excellent courses and communities where one can practice, learn, share, and compare ideas. I will link to two that I particularly like: [Medito](https://medito.app/) and [Healthy Minds](https://hminnovations.org/meditation-app). They are both free, run by non profit foundations, and the latter is also running scientific research on the topic. If you need something more structured, there is the [Joy of Living](https://joy.tergar.org) community that has some of the best courses out there (in my opinion), and many free resources in their youtube channel. There are also plenty of free and paid courses on mindfulness based stress reduction, that can also be good entry points, but the ones linked above have been very helpful for me in general. And, remember, short and regular is better than long and irregular, at least it was for me.
